[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Good morning, everybody,
and welcome to the Crown Towers
Palladium Ballroom.
It's good to see you here
today for the Gabriel Method.
My name is Jack Strom.
I help Jon arrange the seminars.
If you have any questions
or problems during the day,
please do not hesitate
to contact me.
So without any
further ado, I'd like
to introduce a man who lost
103 kilos without dieting,
has changed the lives of
hundreds of thousands of people
around the world, has written a
bestselling book, which is now
being translated into 15
languages, and as I said,
has become an
international bestseller.
And apart from
that, he has totally
transformed his own body.
Would you please welcome
to the stage, Jon Gabriel?
[APPLAUSE]
>> Thanks for all coming.
This is our biggest
seminar ever.
I started doing this about
three years ago in my house
with 20 people doing
a one-day seminar.
And then about two years ago, we
started taking it on the road,
and we did a seminar for
about 100 people in Brisbane
in a church.
And I was pretty
amazed with that.
And now, we've got a room
with 450 people in it.
It's pretty amazing.
And the message that I have
is a very different message
to anything I've ever seen
that's out there in terms
of weight loss.
Every diet program approach
I've ever seen in weight loss
all functions on a basic
paradigm that you can somehow
force yourself to lose weight,
either through willpower,
just gutting it out,
some sort of program
with a eat whatever you want
once a day, or once a week,
or whatever it is-- it's
just always a program.
But the idea is, you can manage
yourself, maintain yourself
through behavior
modification, somehow force
yourself to lose weight and
keep it off in the long term.
And that's not
been my experience.
My experience is that
when your body wants
to be fat for
whatever reason, it's
going to force you
to gain weight.
And if you try to fight it,
it's going to fight back.
And you can control what
you eat in the short term.
But you can't control
how hungry you are.
Right?
And you can't control the
types of foods you're craving.
And if your body
wants to be fat,
it will make you insatiably
hungry for the most
fattening foods possible.
But my approach
is very different.
My approach functions on a
very different basic paradigm.
And that is that if you can get
your body to want to be thin,
then it all happens
automatically.
There's no more
managing yourself.
maintenance schedule.
There's no more
counting calories.
There's no more good
days and bad days.
You simply crave less food.
You crave healthier food.
Your metabolism
actually speeds up,
and you become more
efficient at burning fat.
And so it all happens
automatically.
And then once the
weight's off, there's
no more maintenance schedule
that you have to worry about.
And there's no worrying
about keeping it off forever,
because you weren't
dieting in the first place.
You simply worked with
your body and your body's
basic principles to get
it to want to be thin.
And the message has spread
all over the world now.
As Jack said, the book's being
translated into 15 languages.
And next week, we launch our
Spanish website, El Metado
Gabriel.
And there's a million others
that I can't even pronounce
in different languages.
But we're going to take
it all over the world now.
And the reason
why it's spreading
is because people know
that diets don't work.
People have tried it.
And let's face it.
If diets worked,
there'd be one diet.
Everybody would lose weight,
and that would be the end of it.
There wouldn't be
1,000 diets out there
and a new diet every week, the
avocado diet, the soup diet,
the chicken diet, the doctor
this diet, the once a week
diet-- whatever it is,
there'd be one diet.
Everybody would lose weight,
and that would be the end of it.
Diets don't work.
And I'm going explain to you
exactly why diets don't work--
chemically, physically,
theoretically,
exactly why diets don't work.
And why every time
you go on a diet,
you lose weight
in the short term
and then you have
these cravings,
and then you have this yo-yo.
And so people that have been
yo-yo dieting for 30 years
are now contacting, me
thousands of people,
and saying that they're
finally losing weight,
and they're not dieting.
And that's because they're
working with their body
rather than fighting it.
I always say that dieting
is a little bit like holding
a volleyball under water,
because the second you let go,
poof, it pops right up.
This is very different.
And it's based on
my own experience.
And I'll just tell you
a little bit about that.
Back in 1990, I
moved to New York,
and I started working
on Wall Street.
And back then, I was pretty
much exactly the way I am now.
And I was pretty much one of
those naturally thin people.
You know the types we
all hate that can just
eat whatever they want and just
never have to think about it?
I was like that.
I didn't have to
think about weight.
And I moved to New
York, and I started
working in a high stress
job on Wall Street.
I was making $300 a week as
a bond trading assistant.
And my rent was $400 a week.
It was a pretty stressful job.
And as soon as I moved to New
York, I started gaining weight.
And I didn't think too much
about it in the beginning.
I gained maybe five
kilos, or 10 pounds
in the beginning in the first
year and maybe another five
kilos, or 10 pounds
in the second year.
And everybody gains weight
when they start a job.
You know, you're
sitting in an office,
you're working at a
computer, you're not
thinking about
what you're eating,
and I didn't think
too much about it.
But after a couple of
years, I just kept gaining.
And it didn't stop.
And eventually, after
a couple of years,
I was about 100
kilos, or 220 pounds.
And I decided that
I was going to try
to do something about it, and
I did what everybody does.
I went on a diet.
Because it just
makes sense, right?
Calories in.
Calories out.
Just cut the calories.
So I went on a diet.
And actually, I went
on a lot of diets.
And every diet or program I went
on all had the same pattern.
There'd be a whole list of
things I can't have, right?
No wheat, no fat,
no sugar, no salt.
Whatever it was, I'd follow
the diet to the letter,
because I am a fairly
disciplined person.
I'd follow the
diet to the letter.
I'd lose weight, which
you can do, right?
You can lose weight on a diet.
And I did lose weight.
I'd lose maybe 10
pounds, or five kilos.
And what would happen is, after
about two weeks or three weeks
of hard work, and I'm
feeling good about myself,
and I've lost the weight--
I'm still on the diet, and
I'm not losing weight anymore.
And I don't know if you've
ever had this experience, where
you're dieting and you're just
not losing weight anymore.
And I'm fighting
cravings left and right.
And the smell of
pizza in New York
is at every single
street corner.
And nobody makes pizza
like New Yorkers.
I'm sorry.
It's the best pizza
in the universe.
It's this thin crust.
It's a big piece.
They're like $1.50 a slice.
They sit out on the
lights waiting for you.
And there's smell at
every single corner.
And there's this kind
of science to it, right?
You don't want to get the pizza
when it's right out the oven,
because the crust is too soft.
You want it to sit under the
lights for about an hour, hour
and a half.
And it gets real crispy.
If it sits too long,
it gets too crumbly.
And you just know it.
Like as soon as you a
pizza, you know exactly--
that's 20 minutes.
That's perfect.
I'll take that.
Not that slice.
No, that slice.
That's an hour and a half slice.
I don't want that.
So the smell of pizza would be
at every single street corner.
And then, I just
couldn't take it anymore.
And I had this big binge.
And I don't know if you've
ever had these big binges,
but I used to have
these big binges.
And then, like all the
weight, whatever I lost,
five kilos, 10 kilos, whatever
it was, it would come back,
poof, like that in two days.
And then two days later, I'd
be heavier than when I even
started the diet.
And I remember those binges.
I remember I once had--
when I was having one
of those bad days,
those binges where I
couldn't take anymore--
I once had three
delivery people show up
at my door at the same time,
all waiting for me to pay.
So here, I'm this
big guy, right?
I open the door.
There's three-- there's a
pizza guy, there's Chinese,
and McDonald's
delivers in New York.
You can get anything
you want in New York.
So there's three guys
waiting for me to pay.
So I try to make it off like
there's a party going on.
[LAUGHTER]
Like, hold on guys.
I'll be right there.
How much is this?
OK.
But I'd have this big binge,
and then, poof, all this weight
would come back, just like that.
Whatever it was.
Five kilos, 10 kilos, boom.
Right back.
And then two days
later, three days later,
I'm five kilos heavier than
when I'd even started the diet.
And this went on and
on and on and on.
Lose 10 kilos, gain 10.
Lose 10 kilos, gain 15.
It would go on and on and
on and on for like 11 years.
And when I say I
tried everything,
I mean I really,
really worked hard.
I used to work face to
face with Dr. Atkins.
You know Dr. Atkins
from the Atkins diet?
The no carb diet?
Who can go forever
without carbs, you know?
It's impossible.
But I worked face to face
with him for a month.
I spent over $3,000 with him.
And every Monday morning,
I'd go into his office.
And he was an angry old man.
I got to say.
I did not like Dr. Atkins.
I'm sorry.
I'm going on the
record and saying,
I did not like Dr. Atkins.
I'm sitting in his
office, and he's
got this big, mahogany desk
and this big grandfather clock
that's going tick, tick, tick.
And I'm sitting there kind
of looking down like this,
and he's looking
at my test scores.
And I'm borderline type two
diabetic and metabolic syndrome
and triglycerides through the
roof and high blood pressure,
and blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah.
He just looks up at me.
And I'm sort of
looking down like that,
because I haven't
lost any weight.
He just looks up me and
goes, what are you doing?
You're killing yourself.
And I think to myself, is that
really the best you can do?
You know, you're Dr.
Atkins, and you've
sold 200 million
copies of your book.
And the best you can do is
yell at me for being so fat?
Like, I'm going to lose weight
because you're mad at me?
I don't have enough motivation?
You know, I've got
fitness trainers 7:00
in the morning I'm
meeting with, and I'm
going all day without carbs.
And then, I went to
the Pritikin Institute
in Santa Monica, California.
You know, the Pritikin diet?
Spent two weeks there and I
don't know, maybe $10,000.
And that's the exact
opposite, right?
That's the zero fat diet.
That's the all carb diet.
Right?
[LAUGHTER]
And so one week I'm
on the Atkins diet,
and I go into McDonald's and
I order a quarter pounder.
And I take the bread off.
I just eat the burger.
And the next week, I'm
on the Pritikin diet.
I go to the same
McDonald's, order
the same quarter
pounder with cheese,
and this time I'm eating
the bread and not the meat.
I can't just eat a burger.
And my wife at the
time used to joke to me
that I was on the Atkins diet
during the day and the Pritikin
diet at night.
Because I by the end of the
day, who could go without carbs?
So I jumped ship.
That didn't work, by the way.
I don't recommend that one.
That's a recipe for disaster.
But I did that.
And I had fitness trainers.
I had homeopaths.
Doctors.
I did acupuncture.
Have you ever done
acupuncture for weight loss?
Apparently, there's
an acupressure point
right here on your ear.
And I had seeds taped to my ear.
And so the idea is,
whenever you're hungry,
you're supposed to kind
of rub these seeds,
and it makes your
hunger go away.
So I'm walking down the streets
of New York passing the pizza
places sitting there going
like this rubbing the seeds.
They think I'm some sort of FBI
surveillance agent, you know?
Like, he's taking the
pizza out of the oven.
Looks like it's going
to be a pepperoni.
You know, I'm doing
all these things,
and they all work
in the short term.
And then, I'd bounce back.
And it just kept going and going
and going and going like that.
And this went on until
I gained over 100 kilos.
Lose five kilos, gain 10 kilos,
lose five kilos, gain 10 kilos.
And eventually, I looked
something like that.
That was me in 2001.
And I had a turning
point back then,
about a month
after that picture.
I remember I was driving home
from a movie in New Jersey,
and I was thinking
about the last 11 years.
And I was thinking about,
no matter what I did,
I kept gaining weight.
And what was
interesting for me is
that there was a time that
it wasn't an issue at all.
There was a time
that I never had
to think about weight at all.
And now, no matter what I'm
doing, I'm gaining weight.
And I'm really, really
trying to lose weight.
And there's this
common stereotype
that overweight people are just
weak or lazy or overindulgent,
or they should just eat less.
And I've lived
through that, and if I
have one message to the
world, weight loss is not
about discipline or willpower.
And gaining weight is not
because you're weak or lazy.
There's a legitimate
thing that happens
in your body, a switch
that turns on that puts you
into a fat gaining mode.
And when that switch
is on, your body
gets transformed into
a fat storage machine.
It's very physical and chemical.
And in fact, the number one
expert, the most world renowned
biochemical expert--
his name is Dr.
Jeffrey Friedman.
He's been termed
the Father of Fat.
It's not the most exciting
term in the world,
I don't think really.
I think he deserves better
than that quite frankly.
But anyway, discoverer
of the hormone leptin,
which is the most important
hormone as far as weight loss
and controlling
your body weight--
has said that obesity
is not about willpower,
and losing weight is
not about willpower.
And we've got to
stop blaming people.
And modern conventional
wisdom or medical wisdom
doesn't understand that yet.
I am on a big crusade
right now, and I'm
getting lots and lots
of positive feedback
from the medical community.
I've just been asked to do a
continuing education course
for doctors in the states.
There's been a doctor at
the University of Idaho
who gave a course to
the faculty and staff
at the medical
school, the Gabriel
Method of Weight Reduction.
And I've also been
asked just recently
to go speak again at the
American Holistic Medical
Association.
So doctors are starting
to recognize this
that chemically, physically,
when your body wants to be fat,
it will force you
to gain weight.
Several things happen.
Number one, your brain stops
listening to your stomach
when your body wants to be fat.
Which means that you
can eat and eat and eat,
and the only way you're
going to stop eating
is if your stomach can't
handle anymore food.
And I remember when I
was in that situation
that every time after
every meal, I was just--
I couldn't.
I was bloated.
I was stuffed.
I don't know if you've
ever had that feeling.
But that's because your
brain is intentionally not
listening to your stomach.
It wants you to eat
as much as possible
when your fat switch is on.
Your tongue loses its
sensitivity to sweet foods,
so it causes you to
crave sweeter foods.
Your metabolism slows
down, and your body
goes into fat storage mode.
When you combine
all these things
in a world of excess,
unlimited empty carbs
and nutritionally barren food,
it's a recipe for disaster.
And that's what's happening.
It's not that
you're weak or lazy.
And the same part of the
brain that controls hunger
controls how much sleep we need
and how much oxygen we need.
So imagine you
went to your doctor
and he said, you
know, your problem is
just you sleep too much.
Just sleep less.
You could do that for
a while, couldn't you?
He says, just sleep
two hours a day.
And the whole world judged
you, because you were lazy
because you slept
seven hours a day.
Just sleep two hours a day.
So you could do that for awhile.
You could do it
for a week, maybe.
10 days at the most.
But then what would happen?
Your body would
force you to sleep,
because it has the
ability to do that.
And if you tried to hold
your breath long enough,
your body would
force you to breathe.
It's the same with food.
Your body has the
ability to force
you to eat sooner or later.
So the next time you
go to your doctor
and he tells you to
eat less, you can just
tell him to breathe less.
Because it's the
exact same thing.
And that's what's happening.
People are saying eat less
when they don't understand
that your body is
forcing you to eat,
and I have lived through it.
And now, I've been on
the other side of it.
And now, it's been six,
almost seven years.
I never think about dieting.
Not once.
People that are around me
are amazed at how much I eat.
And you can ask them.
Jackson around here and
everyone that we sit with,
I eat what I want.
I do eat a very healthy
diet, but I never
have to think about weight.
There's never a time I say I'm
not going to have something.
Never.
Not in seven years, almost.
And that's because the
issue's been dealt with.
My body's no longer
forcing me to gain weight.
So yes, so I had the
turning point back in 2001.
And I spent a lot of time
doing research on the internet.
What I decided was, I decided I
was never going to diet again.
Because what's the
point if your body's
forcing you to gain weight?
And I decided,
rather than diet, I
was going to try to figure
out why my body wanted
to be a fat in the
first place and what
I could do to get it
to want to be thin.
And I had a very solid
biochemistry background
from the University
of Pennsylvania,
and that gave me
enough of a foundation
to do the research
on the internet.
And I spent hours and hours
a day studying biochemistry.
And that's when I discovered
this fat switch that we have,
or what I call the fat programs.
And I put together
an approach for me
that worked at dealing with
my issues that were activating
my fat programs.
And I started to lose weight.
And what's interesting is,
I didn't lose weight quickly
in the beginning.
It wasn't like a diet, where
you lose 20 kilos in 20 days
and then you had this
big old rebound thing.
It wasn't like that.
I lost weight slowly
in the beginning.
I lost about 25 kilos
over a six month period.
So it's like a kilo
a week or something.
And when you're over 180
kilos or over 400 pounds,
that's not setting any records.
That's not going to get
you on Biggest Loser.
If I'd ever want to
be on Biggest Loser.
But what happened
is, I wasn't dieting.
I was making sure that I
was nourishing my body,
and I was dealing with
the stresses in my life
that were activating
my fat programs.
And I started to
become less hungry.
But I still craved chocolate.
I still craved junk food.
And whenever I wanted--
I used to keep these chocolate
almonds in the fridge.
And whenever I wanted
one, I'd just have one.
There was no hesitation.
Not the slightest hesitation.
Before, there was always
a good day and a bad day.
And I don't know if
you've ever lived this,
but people live
their whole lives
where every single day is
a good day and a bad day.
It's a battle from
the moment you get up.
Today, you wake up and it's
going to be a good day.
You know, you have
your fruit juice,
and you have your Weetabix, or
you have your whatever it is.
And then around 11:00, you get
these cravings for chocolate
or whatever it is, or a donut.
And today's a good day.
You're not going to do that.
And you gut it out.
And then you get to
lunch, and you're OK.
And it then by the time
it's 4:00, you're exhausted,
and somebody yelled at you.
And you're like, oh, screw it.
And then all of a
sudden, it's a bad day.
And you go to the store,
and you buy all the things
that you've been staring
at for the last two weeks.
You take it home.
Next thing you know,
it's 2:00 in the morning,
and there's pizza
containers on the floor,
and your hands are orange
from cheese twists,
and you've got cupcake
wrappers everywhere.
Boom.
Bad day.
And then, you start again.
Tomorrow, OK.
We're going to start fresh.
So I lived this way.
Every day was a
good day and bad--
I stopped that.
There was no more good
days, no more bad days.
If I wanted a piece of
chocolate, I'd have it.
That's it.
And I'd keep walking.
I just thought, it's
chemicals in, chemicals out.
If I wanted another
one, I'd take it.
But I made sure I
nourished my body.
And I made sure I dealt with the
stresses that were activating
the fat programs.
And the weight
started to come off.
But what was interesting
is, after about six months,
rather than have that
plateau, the weight
actually came off faster.
And I discovered there's
a reason for that.
And that is, when your body
actually wants to be thin--
that is not when you force
yourself to lose weight,
but when you actually get
your body to want to be thin,
it becomes very
efficient at burning fat.
You become more of a
fat burning machine,
and you can lose weight
quicker and quicker.
Right up to the end,
I was losing weight
at maybe two or
three kilos a day.
Those last couple of
kilos, the last 10
kilos that most people say
are impossible to lose,
when you lose that much
weight, it flew off me.
My body just didn't
want the weight anymore.
The issues were done.
The problem was resolved.
It was gone.
End of story.
And when your body
wants to be thin,
it becomes very
efficient at burning fat.
And so the whole time I was
doing this, I was taking notes.
I was writing.
And I was never a
writer, by the way.
I always hated writing.
Like at uni-- I spent
five years at uni,
and I took everything
from biochemistry
to economics to photography.
It didn't matter.
I'd take any course.
My only criteria
was that I wouldn't
have to write anything.
And I only had to
take two courses
where I had to write a paper.
One was English.
I had to take a
semester of English.
And the other was
a management course
that was supposed to
be a guaranteed A.
And I was the only
person I have ever heard
of that got a B in that class.
I just didn't like writing.
But all of a sudden,
what would happen
is, I used to sit every
morning, I'd do this meditation.
And I'd get to a certain
point of the meditation,
and then, boom.
In an instant, all
of this information
would come out of me.
Like boom.
I'd get all this
information, and I'd
write for like 30 pages.
And then, I'd sit
and meditate again.
I'd get to a certain
point, and boom,
I'd get all this information.
I'd start writing and
writing and writing.
And I had this 60 or 90 pages
of stuff, of information.
And then, I transcribed it
on the computer, information
about weight loss, about the way
the body works, the mind body
connection, visualizations.
I had this big old
document I used
to call Weight Loss and
the Meaning of Life.
And it was like
millions of words.
And after I lost the way,
I sort of put it together.
I said, OK.
What is it that I'm saying?
And I put together all
the different categories
of the approach.
And after that, also, I
was on TV very quickly.
I sent my before and after
pictures to The Today Show,
you know, Today Tonight.
I emailed it to them.
And 10 minutes later,
they called me.
I thought maybe in a couple
of months, they'd call.
10 minutes later, they call me.
And I'm talking to them.
And they say, that's great.
We'll be right there.
I said, you'll be right where?
They said, we're coming
over to your house.
I said, I live in Denmark,
Western Australia.
I'm 500 kilometers
south of Perth.
They said, that's all right.
We have a helicopter.
We're going to be there
in an hour and a half.
[LAUGHTER]
I had to go tell my wife--
I had a little two-year-old kid.
The house is a mess.
When you have a
kid, you're not--
my wife was a very
private person.
And I had to tell her that
there was a national film
crew coming in an hour
and a half to talk to us.
It took me an hour
and 15 minutes
to convince her that I
wasn't lying, in which case,
she said, right.
I'm out of here.
Left.
Left me with this big old mess.
I'm sitting there taking
clothes and putting them
in the washing machine,
hiding them anywhere
I can, just to kind
of create a place.
And then they come over, and
we do all this big old thing.
And then the next
thing I know, I'm
getting calls from
people all over.
And I'm seeing patterns
that are similar,
and I'm working with them.
And I'm seeing a lot of
things that I had but then
a lot of things that I
didn't have but still
apply to the basic principles
of what's causing your body
to want to be fat or thin.
And I systematized it
and put it together
in an approach that
applies to everybody.
And so that's what we're going
to be talking about today.
We're going to be talking
about how to get your body
to want to be thin, how to
resolve the issue forever,
how to have an approach so
that when you walk out of here,
you're going to know exactly
what you need to do to resolve
the issue forever.
Maybe it won't
happen immediately.
For some people it will.
But you will know how
to resolve the issue.
So the first thing I
want to talk about,
is why would your body want
to be fat or want to be thin?
You know, I'm up
here, and you guys
are thinking, what's
this guy talking about?
My body doesn't want
to be fat or thin.
Why would your body want to
be fat or want to be thin?
If you can get this
concept, everything else
happens by itself.
Everything else
is just a question
of how do you apply the concept.
But this is the core premise.
And if you can get
this, everything else
fits into place.
And it has to do with the way
your body adapts to stress.
Our bodies are
brilliantly formulated
to adapt to stresses
in our environment.
And I'll give you
a perfect example.
Let's say you go out in the
sun, and you get too much sun.
It's real hot.
Well, that's a stress.
Too much sun is a stress.
And by the way, a
stress is anything
that causes your body
to be alert to the fact
that there may be
a threat out there.
The threat could be
a tiger chasing you.
starving to death.
The threat could be
getting skin cancer.
Whatever the threat
is, that's a stress.
A stress is like an alarm bell.
So let's say you got
go out in the sun,
and you get too much sun.
So what happens?
Your skin gets burned,
and then your skin adapts.
The way it adapts
is, it gets darker
so that the next time you
go out in the sun, your skin
is more protected
from the sunlight.
That's the way our
body adapts to stress.
Now, not enough sun
is also a stress,
because your body
needs sunlight.
It's an essential nutrient.
It creates essential
nutrients in your body.
Not enough sun is a stress.
So if you're in the wintertime,
you're not getting enough sun,
the exact opposite happens.
Your skin gets real light
so it can absorb more sun.
That's how our body
adapts to stresses.
Too much sun is a stress.
Not enough sun is a stress.
So your body's going to
come up with the right skin
tone for whatever
living environment
you're in to maximize
the benefits of the sun
and prevent the harmful
side effects of the sun.
That's how our bodies adapt.
And our bodies way
of adapting has
enabled us to
populate environments
all over the world.
And it's the exact
same with fat.
Now, right now, how fat or thin
you are doesn't matter at all.
We can have all
the food we need.
We don't need fat.
There's no reason our
bodies would need fat.
But there was a time
thousands of years
ago when we did need
fat and when having fat
was crucial to your survival.
And that was when we were living
outdoors thousands of years
ago.
Say you're living outdoors,
and it's wintertime.
It's cold for months
and months and months,
and there's nothing to eat.
What are you going to eat?
There's fruits.
Maybe the lakes are all
iced over so you can't fish.
There's no salads, nuts, seeds.
All the animals are hibernating.
And it's cold out.
Well, that's a
stress on your body.
And that stress causes
a particular type
of chemistry in your body.
And that chemistry alerts
your body to the fact
that there's a famine out
there and that it's cold out.
And the way your body adapts is
by getting fatter when it can.
What happens when
you're in that stress
is your body activates what I
call the fat programs designed
to help you put on weight.
It's as if your body says,
we're living in a world
where every once in a
while there's famines,
so we need to carry
extra weight on us.
And your bodies have an ideal
weight of what they want to be.
It's called a set point.
So let's say your body
wants to be 80 kilos.
Let's say it wants
to be 80 kilos.
And then, you go
through a famine
where you have that stress
of not having enough
to eat for months and
months and months.
What happens is, your
body shifts its set point.
Your body says, I
want to be 90 kilos.
Maybe you lose 10
kilos from the famine.
You go down to 70 kilos.
But your body actually
wants to be 90 kilos now.
So when there's food available,
you eat and eat and eat,
and your metabolism
slows down, so you
don't want to do exercise.
You stay real sedentary.
You eat and eat until you get to
your ideal weight of 90 kilos,
so a famine is actually going
to make your body want to be fat
even if you lose weight.
And what's interesting
is, all the things
that are out there in terms
of weight loss like diet
and pills and all
these things, anything
that focuses on forcing
you to lose weight
will get your body
to want to be fatter.
So what I want you to
think about from now on is,
how fat or thin does
my body want to be?
Not how do I force
myself to be thin?
To be fat?
So a famine will cause your
body to want to be fat.
Now, we don't have
famines anymore.
When was the last time
anyone went through a famine?
Can I see a show of hands?
No?
No famines?
No.
We don't famines anymore.
And when it's cold out,
we can put on clothes,
and we live indoors.
We don't have to worry
about cold weather.
And the reason why
cold causes your body
to want to hold onto
fat is because fat
is like an insulator.
It keeps your body
warm and protects you
from the outside hostile,
cold environment.
So fat acts as protection.
Protection from famines,
not having enough,
and protection from a
hostile environment.
That's the purpose of fat.
Now, we don't have
those things anymore.
We don't have famines, and
we don't have cold weather
that we have to worry about.
But we still have this fat
program, this fat switch
that can activate.
And we still have stresses.
And sometimes for some people,
the stresses in our lives
cause the exact same
chemistry as a famine.
And that could be a physical
stress of not having enough
to eat, like a diet or
being nutritionally famined,
or a mental or emotional
stress, or the other things
that we're going to talk about.
But the stress causes the
same chemistry as a famine.
And when that happens,
your body gets
tricked into activating
these fat programs.
It gets tricked into activating
these ancient survival
programs.
So you're driving to work
and it's rush hour traffic,
and you know you're
going to be late,
and your boss is going to be mad
at you, that's causing stress.
And that stress is
causing chemistry,
and your body doesn't
know what to do with that.
Your body's designed,
brilliantly designed
to protect you from stress,
from whatever the threat is.
It doesn't know
what the threat is.
It just knows what the chemistry
is that's being caused.
And sometimes, that chemistry
is the same as the fat programs.
So you're sitting
there in your car,
you're not eating anything,
and you're getting fatter.
Simply because we
have these programs.
Now, we also have a
program inside of us
that forces us to get thin.
I call it the get thin
or get eaten adaptation.
And what that is is, if
you were living-- let's
say you were living in a
very different environment
thousands of years ago.
Let's say that it
wasn't a famine.
It was a warm, tropical climate.
Now, in a warm
tropical climate, you
don't need fat to
keep you warm, right?
To protect you from the cold.
And there's delicious fruits.
I just in Thailand for a
month doing a yoga retreat
and meeting with this guy who's
doing our Spanish webiste.
And the fruit is
just so incredible.
I mean, there's so many
different varieties
of delicious papayas
and this fruit
called durian,
and longans, and--
You don't like durian?
It smells.
It stinks.
It's so delicious.
I'm a durian addict.
People either love
durian or hate durian.
I love durian.
But there's so many
different fruits.
You can fish.
There's delicious--
everything's fresh.
There's plenty of food.
You don't need fat anymore.
Now, in an
environment like that,
if you were living in an
your body would then say, we
don't need to be 90 kilos.
We can go back to 80 kilos,
because we don't need weight
anymore.
Those stresses aren't there
activating your fat programs.
There's no cold, and
there's plenty to eat.
So if there's plenty to eat, and
you can eat whatever you want--
and by the way, eating whatever
you want whenever you want
is a very natural
state of being.
It's only very recently that
we've stopped doing that.
But if you were living
in that environment
and you could eat whatever
you want whenever you want,
it was warm, your body wouldn't
want to be fat anymore.
So your set point
would go back to 80.
Now, let's take
it a step further.
Imagine in this
living environment,
there were wild tigers.
And every couple of
weeks, or every couple
of days, whatever, they
came into your village,
and they chased you.
And if you weren't lightning
fast, you were dead.
You know, I thought about it.
I thought, you don't really
need to be faster than a tiger
to escape being attacked.
You just need to be faster than
the guy running next to you.
[LAUGHTER]
Right?
Sorry, Bob.
Always did like you.
But you have to be fast.
And if you're not lightning
fast, you're dead.
That's a different
type of stress
that causes different
chemistry in your body.
That chemistry alerts
your body to the fact
that if you are not
thin, you are dead.
I call it the the get thin
or get eaten adaptation.
When that happens, your body
goes, we need to be 60 kilos.
We need to shed all our weight.
It makes your body
want to be thinner.
So a famine is going to make
your body want to be fatter,
and a tiger is going to make
your body want to be thinner.
These are programs.
Survival programs that we
have in our body to help us
stay alive.
What's the threat?
Starving to death?
Get fatter.
Slow down your metabolism.
Be sedentary.
What's the threat?
Tigers can eat you?
Get thinner.
You develop the
metabolism of a greyhound.
You just eat a little bit.
You're like, I'm
not hungry anymore.
Your brain starts
listening to your stomach.
You have a little bit of food.
And if you look at
naturally thin people
and if you notice when they
eat, they'll eat milkshakes,
and they'll eat pizza
and something else,
but they'll just take
a couple of bites,
and it's sitting there.
And you're staring
at that pizza.
Let me have two--
I can finish that in
30-- you can't even
focus on the conversation,
because they've
got this gorgeous
pizza, and you've
got your fat-free,
wheat-free Weetabix, whatever
you're eating.
Burger without the bread and
bread without the burger.
Whatever.
And they're having
their milkshake,
and they're talking to you.
And they're really engaged
in the conversation.
You can't listen to a
word they're saying.
You know, just, what?
Because their brain's listening.
Their brain starts to
listen to their stomach.
Their metabolism speeds up.
And they want to be active.
And this is because
that survival program
is being activated.
And what's interesting
about stress--
and nobody's ever been
able to explain this,
and I'm sure you've
all noticed this--
is the same stress will
make one person fatter
and another person thinner.
You know those people,
they get stressed
and they start losing
all that weight?
Oh, I'm so stressed.
I can't eat anything.
You know, they just
lose all that weight.
You're like, great.
Good for you.
I'm so sorry to hear that.
You know what I'm talking about?
Oh, I can't eat anything.
It's because it's activating
a different survival
program inside their brain.
It's the same stress.
Different adaptation.
Different program.
And I remember when I was
working on Wall Street,
I had a business partner.
And we worked in the same desk.
He was right on the
other side of me.
And we worked
together for 11 years.
And the whole time I
was working with him,
I was getting fatter
and fatter and fatter,
and he was getting thinner
and thinner and thinner.
And this guy used to order
milkshakes for lunch.
He'd call up and they'd go,
uh, what will you have today?
Uh, I think I'll
have a milkshake.
And he'd have this
milkshake on his desk,
and he'd have a couple of sips.
It'd be sitting there.
And I'd be ordering my hamburger
without the bun one week
and my bun without the
hamburger the next week.
And I'd be trying
to work, and I'd
be staring at his
milkshake thinking,
if I could just have 30 seconds.
Suck that thing down.
Get a big old brain freeze.
And it would just
be sitting there.
And he was getting
thinner and thinner.
But what was different
about him than me is the way
he reacted to stress.
See, whenever things
went wrong in the office,
I would just sort of just
sit there and just take it.
Which, when you think about
it, is very similar to the way
you would react in a famine.
If you're in a famine, you
can't run away from it.
You can't fight it.
You just have to take it.
You have to just
sort of slow down.
That's what I did.
I just took it.
I just sort of slowed down.
But this guy, the slightest
thing that would go wrong,
and he would flail his arms.
The fax machine wouldn't work,
and he'd throw the fax machine
on the ground.
He'd go, fuck.
Bernard, we need another
fucking fax machine.
[LAUGHTER]
And I'd say to him,
well, Dave, Bernard's
getting another fax machine.
But the next time that
happens, if you just
press that green button,
that's the start button.
It shouldn't happen again.
But everything.
He would react.
It was like he was in a battle.
It's like he was in a war.
And so we're sitting at the
same desk doing the same job
and the same stress.
But to my body, it was like
I was in an arctic wasteland
starving to death.
And to his body, he was in the
African Savannah fighting off
tigers left and right.
Lions.
Someone reminded me, there's no
tigers in the African savanna.
Fighting off lions
left and right.
Same stress,
different adaptations.
So the key is to
figure out what's
activating the fat programs in
you and turn those stresses off
and then to impose
other stresses that
will make your body
activate the get thin
or get eaten adaptation.
So in the Gabriel Method, I talk
about a number of stresses that
can activate the fat programs.
I'll just tell you
them quickly right now.
Number one is dieting.
Dieting activates the
fat programs, right?
Why?
It's a famine.
That's the whole point
of the fat programs
is to protect you from famines.
So great.
It's brilliant logic.
It makes sense.
Calories in, calories out.
Cut your calories.
Yes.
Wrong.
Simply because it activates
your body's fat programs.
You lose weight, but your
body wants to be fatter.
So dieting forces
you to gain weight,
or dieting gets your body to
activate the fat programs.
But you can be eating
to your heart's content,
but you can still be in
a nutritional famine.
You can still be in
And that's because
the food we eat today
is nutritionally barren.
It doesn't have the specific
nutrients we need in a way
that our bodies can
digest and assimilate.
It's invented food.
Now, I'm not telling
you to cut it out,
but I am telling
you to add foods
that have the nutrients
your body needs
in a way your body can
digest and assimilate
if your body's activating
the fat programs because
of a nutritional famine.
So what happens is, when
you're in a nutritional famine,
your body stays hungry
all the time looking
for these specific nutrients.
And you're not
giving it to them.
So it's not about
calories in, calories out.
And it's not about whether
it's carbs, proteins, or fats.
It's about what carbs?
What proteins?
What fats?
Have the specific
nutrients your body needs.
So I have two very
counter intuitive
counter to mainstream
wisdom messages
for the world about weight loss.
Number one is that obesity
is caused by starvation.
I bet no one's ever
told you that before.
Starvation, meaning
in some way, your body
is being tricked into activating
a starvation response.
Obesity is caused by starvation.
Number two, if it's
caused by starvation,
the solution isn't necessarily
to cut foods out but to add.
Add the foods your
body is starving for.
So the only way you can
be off the Gabriel Method,
if there's a method,
is if you're not
adding everyday the
specific nutrients you need.
You're not going to lose 20
kilos in 20 days doing that,
but what's going
to happen is you're
going to address the
real issue, and you
will be less hungry over time.
And you will speed
up your metabolism.
Your body will
want to be thinner.
So a nutritional family can
activate the fat programs.
Toxins.
Toxins activate
your fat programs.
We're swimming in a world of
artificial toxins, thousands
and thousands of toxins.
Our body stores toxins
in your fat cells.
If you're taking in more
toxins than you can eliminate,
your body has to store them.
Fat cells are a chemically
neutral buffer environment
that can protect your
body from toxins.
One study found that
there are over 800 toxins
in an average person's fat cell.
When you're trying
to lose weight
and you're taking
in too many toxins,
your body will slow down
the fat loss process,
because burning the fat causes
you to release those toxins
into your bloodstream.
And your body's actually
trying to protect you
from your own poisons.
So toxins can cause you to
activate your fat programs.
Medications.
Certain medications
will cause you
to activate your fat programs.
And what's interesting is,
I deal with a lot of people
that-- for example,
they're taking
medication for bipolar disease.
Now, the reason they
have bipolar disease
is because they don't have
enough omega 3 fatty acids
in their system.
And that causes a lot of
chemical brain malfunctions.
And then they go on
some sort of medication
that causes you to gain weight.
And there's lots of different
medications that-- not all,
but there are a lot of
different medications
that cause you to gain weight.
What I always try to
encourage people to do
is, by working with the
Gabriel Method principles
are dealing with stress and
adding nutrients and reducing
toxins, working with your doctor
to get off of medications.
And people have gotten
off medications for type
2 diabetes, heart disease,
high blood pressure, asthma,
all kinds of digestive problems,
bipolar disease, depression,
et cetera.
Artificial ingredients like
aspartame and NutraSweet--
we'll talk more about that--
can activate the fat programs.
Mental and emotional stress.
Every time you have
stress, it causes chemistry
of some sort in your body.
Sometimes, mental stress
causes the exact same chemistry
as a famine.
And we're going to
talk a lot about that.
But what we're going
to do is, we're
to devise an approach that
systematically gets your body
to want to be thinner.
So if your body wants to be,
say, 110 kilograms right now,
we're going to start
adding nutrients.
That's going to get your
body to maybe only want
to be 100 kilos.
We're going to deal with
mental and emotional stress.
That's going to get your
body to want to be 90 kilos.
We're going to deal with
toxins, medications,
artificial ingredients.
80 kilos.
We're going to impose
stresses that get your body
to want to be thinner.
60 kilos.
So little by little,
your body wants
to be thinner and
thinner and thinner
until the whole process
happens by itself.
And so what we're going
to do right now is,
we're going to
take a short break.
And when we come
back, we're going
to deal with the
physical stresses
that cause your body to want
to activate the fat programs
and how to address those.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
>> What I found in the book was
that it was kind of a necessary
smack up the side of the head
into the world of common sense.
But the common
sense part, I just--
I need to read it
again, and then I
want to read it
again after that.
Because I really want to
convince my head that it's OK.
It's OK to succeed at this one.
The fear of success
comes with the weight
and a whole lot of things.
So I think this is going to
fix a whole lot of problems,
just shift them into reality.
In January this year, my husband
gave me the Gabriel Method
book, and I haven't turned back.
I lost 20 kilos since
January this year.
And it's been wonderful.
It's changed my life.